NIP-76 Relay Read Permissions (#1497)
nostr-protocol/nips: 76.md

NIP-76
======

Relay Read Permissions
----------------------

`draft` `optional`

Tag names `rp` (read permission) and `prp` (probabilistic read permission) define which keys are authorized to download an event from the relay. 

Events with an `rp` or `prp` require AUTH to be downloaded.

## Read Permission

The `rp` tag takes a pubkey. Multiple `rp` tags represent a logical OR. 

```json
["rp", "<pubkey1>"]
["rp", "<pubkey2>"]
["rp", "<pubkey3>"]
```

Relays MUST check if the authed user is one of the keys in the `rp` before sending the event to the client.

## Probabilistic Read Permissions

Probabilistic permissions use bloom filters of a set of authorized pubkeys. They are represented by a colon-separated value with: 
1. the number of bits in the bit array
2. the number of hashing rounds used by the filter 
3. the bit array in Base64.

```json

> ["prp", "<bits>:<rounds>:<base64>"]

Reviewer: Apart from obvious issues of a probabilistic access control and access for more than two parties in general, probabilistic filters can easily be brute-forced even if relays honor them.

As the event itself would store the parameters of the Bloom Filter, it could already vary bits and rounds to through off an attacker but it's certainly not meant for that.

I would add a `<salt>` parameter here that gets used in the hashing as `return BigInt(sha256(value || salt || index)) % size`

    fun bitIndex(value: ByteArray, index: Byte) {
        return BigInt(sha256(value || index)) % size
    }

    fun add(pubkey: HexKey) {
        val value = pubkey.hexToByteArray()

        for (index in 0 until rounds) {
            bits[bitIndex(value, index)] = true 
        }
    }

    fun mightContains(pubkey: HexKey): Boolean {
        val value = pubkey.hexToByteArray()

        for (index in 0 until rounds) {
            if (!bits[bitIndex(value, index)]) {
                return false
            }
        }

        return true
    }

    fun encode() {
        return size + ":" + rounds + ":" + base64Encode(bits.toByteArray()) 
    }
    
    fun decode(str: String): BloomFilter {
        val parts = str.split(":")
        return BloomFilter(parts[0].toInt(), parts[1].toInt(), base64Decode(parts[2]))
    }
}
```

Relays MUST check if the authed user is in the filter before returning the event.

Multiple `prp` tags represent a logical OR. 

### Test cases

The filter below has 100 bits, with 10 rounds of hashes that should be able to match 10,000,000 keys without a single false positive.

```json
["prp", "100:10:QGKCgBEBAAhIAApO"]
```

> It includes keys `ca29c211f1c72d5b6622268ff43d2288ea2b2cb5b9aa196ff9f1704fc914b71b` and `460c25e682fda7832b52d1f22d3d22b3176d972f60dcdc3212ed8c92ef85065c`

Reviewer: Looking at this and under the assumption of salt getting added, I wonder what's even the point of rp apart from superstition.

Let's say you want to encode just one key and spend the same amount of bytes, what are the odds of a successful brute force or random collision?

```json
[
  ["pr", "ca29c211f1c72d5b6622268ff43d2288ea2b2cb5b9aa196ff9f1704fc914b71b"],
  ["prp", "200:100:QGKCgBEBAAhIAApOQGKCgBEBAAhIAApO:QGKCgBEBAAhIAApOQGKCgB"]
```

This example doesn't really work. It's just to illustrate the idea. The giant salt should totally stop interactive brute forcing. May others put a number to the odds of matching the 200:100 part but it's astronomical.

Author: yeah, I added the `rp` for use cases when certainty is absolutely needed.  But I am not sure if it will be used.

    }

    fun add(pubkey: HexKey) {
        val value = pubkey.hexToByteArray()

        for (index in 0 until rounds) {
            bits[bitIndex(value, index)] = true 
        }
    }

    fun mightContains(pubkey: HexKey): Boolean {
        val value = pubkey.hexToByteArray()

        for (index in 0 until rounds) {
            if (!bits[bitIndex(value, index)]) {
                return false
            }
        }

        return true
    }

    fun encode() {
        return size + ":" + rounds + ":" + base64Encode(bits.toByteArray()) + ":" + base64Encode(salt) 
    }
    
    fun decode(str: String): BloomFilter {
        val [sizeStr, roundsStr, bufferB64, saltB64] = str.split(":")
        return BloomFilter(sizeStr.toInt(), roundsStr.toInt(), base64Decode(bufferB64), base64Decode(saltB64))
    }
}
```

When responding to `REQ`s, if an event contains `prp` tags, relays MUST verify that the authenticated user is either the event's author or matches any of the filters before delivering it to the client.

If both `rp` and `prp` tags are present, the authenticated user MUST either be in the `rp` set or match any `prp` filter.

### Test cases

> The filter below has 100 bits and uses 10 rounds of hashing, which should be capable of handling up to 10,000,000 keys without producing any false positives.
> 
> ```json
> ["prp", "100:10:AAAkAQANcYQFCQoB:hZkZYqqdxcE="]
> ```
> 
> It includes keys `ca29c211f1c72d5b6622268ff43d2288ea2b2cb5b9aa196ff9f1704fc914b71b` and `460c25e682fda7832b52d1f22d3d22b3176d972f60dcdc3212ed8c92ef85065c`

Reviewer: As @jooray mentions, the math must be off here. Also the wording is wrong.

A filter by itself has no false positives ever. It has a false positive rate (FPR).

So what the nip author meant was 10 million npubs not colliding randomly with a bloom filter that has 2 elements, 100 bits and 10 rounds.

With the chosen parameters, the FPR is of the order E-8 - 1 in 26 million, so yes, with 10 million accounts, it's more likely none of them collides with any specific such filter than not but there is no guarantee about this being collision-free.

````suggestion
The filter below has 100 bits and uses 10 rounds of hashing, which would achieve a false positive rate of 1 in 26 million.

```json
["prp", "100:10:AAAkAQANcYQFCQoB:hZkZYqqdxcE="]
```

It includes only the keys `ca29c211f1c72d5b6622268ff43d2288ea2b2cb5b9aa196ff9f1704fc914b71b` and `460c25e682fda7832b52d1f22d3d22b3176d972f60dcdc3212ed8c92ef85065c`
````

That said, 10 rounds are not a good choice of parameters for 2 elements. I'm not an expert on this and only plaid around with https://hur.st/bloomfilter/ but that tool suggests that with the same filter size but 35 rounds you would get an FPR of 1 in 27 **b**illion.

Author: Test code is here if you want to play around :)

https://github.com/vitorpamplona/amethyst/blob/428ed464afbcbdb2c50eb224d276ff87ae3836e5/quartz/src/androidTest/java/com/vitorpamplona/quartz/bloom/BloomFilter.kt#L110
